[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, today's episode is about behavioral economics.
[Amit Varma]: Richard Taylor, one of the pioneers of this field, won the Nobel Prize for Economics recently
[Amit Varma]: and honestly he might as well have won the Nobel Prize for understanding human nature.
[Amit Varma]: I keep telling friends that while the term sounds geeky, behavioral economics is, simply
[Amit Varma]: put, the study of human nature.
[Amit Varma]: To celebrate Taylor's Nobel Prize, and in fact the whole field of behavioral economics,
[Amit Varma]: I asked Nidhi Gupta to join me on this show.
[Amit Varma]: Nidhi is the head of postgraduate programs at the Takshashila Institution in Bangalore
[Amit Varma]: and is a graduate of the London School of Economics and Political Science.
[Amit Varma]: One of her main research interests is behavioral economics.
[Amit Varma]: I caught up with her a couple of weeks ago.
[Amit Varma]: Nidhi, welcome to the show.
[Guest]: It's a pleasure to be here, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Nidhi, we are both pretty much fellow behavioral economics geeks in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we've studied the subject and are both fans of Richard Taylor who won the Nobel Prize
[Guest]: recently.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And I'm very excited that, you know, finally behavioral economics is getting its due and
[Amit Varma]: it's being recognized.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, Daniel Kahneman won it so many years back as well.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I often think that the term behavioral economics makes it sound more niche
[Amit Varma]: and specialized than it should be, that what it really is, is the study of human nature.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, if you want to sort of understand the unseen effects of many things, understanding
[Amit Varma]: human nature is the key to that.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, behavioral economics is the key to that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, economics is finally about the incentives that people respond to or how
[Guest]: they use the scarce resources.
[Guest]: And if you're talking about people, you can't take the psychology of people away from it.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: That's what behavioral economics does, right?
[Guest]: It brings that psychology back into the hard science that economics is kind of touted to
[Amit Varma]: be.
[Amit Varma]: And you actually teach behavioral economics in the Takshashila courses.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, what I'd like to sort of do today is let's talk about some specific fundas
[Amit Varma]: of behavioral economics and which have come from behavioral economics.
[Amit Varma]: Our first example, in fact, being a term coined by Thaler himself.
[Amit Varma]: And then illustrate that with what is happening in the world around us, both in politics and
[Guest]: otherwise.
[Guest]: Perfect.
[Guest]: So I like to think of behavioral economics, I kind of separate heuristics and biases.
[Guest]: So heuristics are basically shortcuts that people use to make decisions.
[Guest]: And heuristics kind of lead to biases.
[Guest]: So what I'd like to talk today is biases, you know, we won't touch upon heuristics.
[Guest]: So the first one that I'd like to start with is something known as endowment effect, which
[Guest]: basically says that you value the things that you own much more than somebody else does.
[Guest]: In fact, so much so that the moment you start owning something, the value that you ascribe
[Guest]: to it becomes higher than what you did just before.
[Guest]: And this kind of plays out really well if you think of how when a government is in opposition,
[Guest]: how they are always critical of the policies that the government in power is coming out
[Guest]: with or the policies that they have.
[Guest]: But when they themselves come to power, they take a lot of these policies and continue
[Guest]: with them.
[Guest]: In fact, you see now a lot of, I think more around 19 policies of the UPA have been taken
[Guest]: by BJP and renamed.
[Guest]: And now they are suddenly, you know, they've become these very nice policies that are going
[Guest]: to change India and that are going to bring about prosperity.
[Guest]: So whether you look at the Jan Dhan scheme, you know, the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana,
[Guest]: there was a UPA scheme, which was called Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account, or you look
[Guest]: at Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, you know, the flagship scheme.
[Guest]: There was the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan or a total sanitation campaign that the UPA had.
[Guest]: There isn't a lot of change in what these policies, the details of the policies, but
[Guest]: it's just that now, because the government, it's the BJP's policies or the NDA's policies,
[Guest]: they suddenly, you know, are the right, they have all the right elements to it.
[Guest]: Or you look at Indira Awas Yojana, which was UPA scheme.
[Guest]: And now it's called, I think, Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana.
[Guest]: And it's funny that when you even go to Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana's website, actually some
[Guest]: of the documents, if you open them, they actually still refer back to Indira Awas Yojana.
[Guest]: So it's funny that, you know, they say, oh, Indira Awas Yojana was all crap and you know,
[Guest]: how it would not meet the goals, while you yourselves are incorporating most of the things
[Amit Varma]: of that policy.
[Amit Varma]: It's just a different name.
[Amit Varma]: And you'd argue that this is not just a question of political convenience, but that humans
[Amit Varma]: are actually wired to value something more when they own it than they would if they did
[Guest]: not own it.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I mean, you could find a lot of individual examples that, you know, for example, if you're
[Guest]: in a secondhand market, right, you want to sell your car, you would almost always think
[Guest]: that your car, you know, should fetch you higher than what anybody else is willing to
[Guest]: pay for it.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: That's a classic example.
[Amit Varma]: And I was a professional poker player for a few years.
[Amit Varma]: And I always use poker to give, to illustrate examples of behavioral economics.
[Amit Varma]: And the classic example of this in poker is that if someone tells me about a hand that
[Amit Varma]: he's playing and asks for my advice, at some point, I'll be able to say, hey, no, man,
[Amit Varma]: you should fold it.
[Amit Varma]: It's not classy.
[Amit Varma]: We do keep playing.
[Amit Varma]: But if I'm myself in the same situation, you'd continue playing instinctively, I want to
[Amit Varma]: continue playing.
[Amit Varma]: I have to fight that impulse because now that it is my hand, I value it more somehow magically
[Amit Varma]: and can't think objectively about it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So this is one example that we can think of.
[Guest]: This is one of the biases.
[Guest]: The other one that I like to talk about is the sunk cost fallacy.
[Guest]: So traditionally, economics would tell you that if you put in your time, effort or money
[Guest]: in a particular, you know, endeavor, you should stop continuing further if you don't see benefits
[Guest]: coming off it.
[Guest]: But as humans, if we've invested time, effort and money in a particular thing, we actually
[Guest]: keep adding on to it.
[Guest]: And you know, there is this fallacy that now that I have put in some effort and money,
[Guest]: let me just, you know, continue and see what comes of it.
[Guest]: For example, if I've bought a movie ticket and then I hear a lot of people saying, oh,
[Guest]: the movie was crap.
[Guest]: But now that I've bought the ticket, let me just go and, you know, watch the movie anyways.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a fallacy because the time you're spending is also worth something and you're
[Amit Varma]: wasting that time.
[Amit Varma]: And you should just think of the price of the ticket as a sunk cost.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And in fact, it's not just individuals.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It actually plays out at a public policy or the government level.
[Guest]: Now we all know that Air India, you know, it was known for a long time that it's not
[Guest]: making profits.
[Guest]: It does not even provide the quality of service that's expected of an international airline.
[Guest]: But look at how long it survived.
[Guest]: Look at how much money went into keeping Air India and Indian Airlines alike, even though
[Guest]: we got so many budget airlines and really good quality international airlines, you know,
[Guest]: in the market.
[Guest]: Why has the government not done away with Air India?
[Guest]: It's only now, you know, in the last two years that we are talking about privatization of
[Guest]: Air India or, you know, doing a mix of like a PPP or actually just doing away with it.
[Amit Varma]: It's only now that we are actually doing this.
[Amit Varma]: I'm skeptical to me.
[Amit Varma]: It's just talk.
[Guest]: It's just, yeah.
[Guest]: We are yet to see what happens.
[Guest]: Or for example, think of bailouts for public sector banks, right?
[Guest]: Now that any public sector unit, now that you've put in money, you know, you, you kind
[Guest]: of think, oh, let me just put in a little more and see, maybe it will get better.
[Guest]: While the rational, you should think that, well, that money is gone, that effort is gone.
[Guest]: Why put in more resources and why unnecessarily, you know, enhance the costs, the overall costs?
[Guest]: Would we continue the recapitalization of banks is not something that, you know, is
[Guest]: very old, maybe three, four days ago is when we heard of recapitalization again of public
[Amit Varma]: sector.
[Guest]: And it's going to happen again and again.
[Amit Varma]: I can think of various examples of this from everyday life.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the standard poker example is that you continue in a pot when you should fold
[Amit Varma]: because you're, you're thinking, oh, I've already put in money, it will get wasted.
[Amit Varma]: Even though the rational decision at that moment in time, the plus EV decision is to
[Amit Varma]: fold.
[Amit Varma]: And there are trivial examples in real life.
[Amit Varma]: Like I may pack a tiffin from home, but then my colleagues say, hey, let's go to that nice
[Amit Varma]: Japanese restaurant and I really want to, but I'm saying, no, I made a sandwich in the
[Amit Varma]: morning and it's in my tiffin and it'll get, you know, and that's, again, you should treat
[Guest]: that sandwich as a sunk cost.
[Guest]: I love how you've understood all of behavioral economics with poker in mind.
[Amit Varma]: I just love it.
[Amit Varma]: With poker in mind and it actually, and fallacies like this is serious real life implications.
[Amit Varma]: Like I think a lot of bad marriages, for example, continue long past the point where they should
[Amit Varma]: because of the sunk cost fallacy, because of some battered woman saying, I've already
[Amit Varma]: spent 20 years with this guy, how can I walk out now?
[Guest]: Maybe it will get better.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe if I put in more, sure.
[Guest]: And you can rationalize all that.
[Guest]: You know what Taylor mentions is that a lot of people in the US thought that we should
[Guest]: get out of Vietnam war, but it continued and that he at least says that, you know, that's
[Amit Varma]: an example of sunk cost fallacy.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, these little fallacies would seem like, you know, fancy phrases in
[Amit Varma]: textbooks actually have real world humanitarian consequences and affect millions of people.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: What's your next example?
[Guest]: So the next example I would like to talk about is called present bias in easy terms and hyperbolic
[Guest]: discounting in very technical terms.
[Guest]: But that is something that all of us can relate to on individual level, which is I value the
[Guest]: now much higher than I value the future.
[Guest]: So I want a smaller, sooner reward than a larger later reward.
[Guest]: I would rather have the pizza now than think about, Oh, in the next five years I will have
[Guest]: put on weight and I will have to exercise, or I would rather break my new year resolution
[Guest]: now than worry about how I will feel bad about it sometime later.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And we all do it all the time, procrastination, laziness, overeating, indulging.
[Amit Varma]: We do it all the time.
[Guest]: I feel like you're describing me or myself and even not saving enough.
[Guest]: For example,
[Guest]: I'm not saving enough and at individual level, you know, you can tackle these things by committing
[Guest]: to certain things.
[Guest]: So you say that, okay, I will enroll myself in this marathon.
[Guest]: And only if I have run so much, am I going to indulge in a big dessert?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: A lot of people do that.
[Guest]: But where I see this playing out in public policy, look at how the governments in the
[Guest]: US, for example, have the 401k savings or in India where we have the employee provident
[Guest]: fund schemes.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It is a welfare scheme, of course, but somehow the governments have understood that if we
[Guest]: don't kind of force people or make people commit to their own future savings, they would
[Guest]: not do it.
[Guest]: So what they essentially do it, they say that, no, you must save this much.
[Guest]: And they also have your employer put in, you know, an equivalent amount.
[Guest]: And when you retire, you have this big fund, you know, there for you.
[Guest]: And this is especially relevant for people who don't earn really well.
[Guest]: So, you know, the EPF is mandatory for people, for companies with more than 20 people, I
[Guest]: think.
[Guest]: And for people who earn, whose wages are below 21,000.
[Guest]: So maybe not for, you know, people who work in big private companies.
[Guest]: It's not mandatory, although even these companies register for it.
[Guest]: But think of somebody who earns 15,000, 16,000, for them building up this sum is really important.
[Guest]: And they might not do it because there are always priorities, competing priorities in
[Guest]: the here and now that you want to take care of.
[Guest]: So like, like they say, right, eat, drink and be merry for, you may die tomorrow, but
[Guest]: you actually do not die tomorrow and you continue to live for a long time.
[Guest]: And it's better for you to save, save up for that.
[Amit Varma]: And if you can take a slight tangent, this brings me to one of the criticisms many people
[Amit Varma]: have of Thaler per se, not the field, which is of the term that I think he coined called
[Amit Varma]: libertarian paternalism, and which the book nudges about, which he co-wrote with Cass
[Amit Varma]: Sunstein is almost that the government has a duty to nudge people in these directions
[Amit Varma]: to mitigate the effects of their biases.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, my typical instinctive criticism to that is that while it is one thing to understand
[Amit Varma]: human nature, it is another to then coerce people in different ways, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the EPF being compulsory for firms of over a certain size is an example of that.
[Amit Varma]: It is another to coerce people and take that agency away from them.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like saying, Hey, you're too stupid to make your own decisions.
[Guest]: That's the big criticism of the whole field of behavioral economics.
[Guest]: In fact, if you think of a libertarian paternalism is an oxymoron, right?
[Amit Varma]: You can't have libertarian and paternalism in the same, you can't speak of them in the
[Guest]: same breath.
[Guest]: But that's what Taylor and Sunstein, at least how they feel it is that we do not take choices
[Guest]: away from people.
[Guest]: When we are thinking of behavioral interventions, they always are free to choose what they want.
[Guest]: It's just nudging them in a particular direction.
[Guest]: And, and of course there are critiques and critiques of critics and it never ends.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I just feel that if a guy is earning 15,000 a month and he's saying, no, I don't want
[Amit Varma]: to give any of this away to a fund for when I'm 60, I need the money now, that choice
[Amit Varma]: should really be up to him.
[Amit Varma]: Even if he recognized that this biosexist.
[Guest]: Well, you also can then think of if these people haven't saved enough, then it's up
[Guest]: to the government to then provide for them.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: We also say that, Hey, well, the government should provide healthcare, but if the government
[Guest]: says, well, you should pay for your health insurance so that when you are sick, you know,
[Guest]: we will be able to fund.
[Guest]: But that's the example that at least NHS in the UK, you know, they, they say that the
[Guest]: burden of healthcare is increasingly becoming larger.
[Guest]: And if the people don't save up for their health or save up for their life insurance,
[Guest]: it is for the government to then spend money.
[Guest]: We also criticize the government then that, Oh, you know, where is the money for it?
[Guest]: So I agree with you that, you know, it shouldn't be coerced upon people.
[Guest]: It should rather be voluntary profit and fund, but, and I'm not one for EPF, but that there
[Guest]: is a mechanism that is provided as a public policy that, you know, there are these commitment
[Guest]: devices that are provided by the government itself, and you can then draw this pension.
[Guest]: That I think is an example that we can look at.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, I would certainly say that wherever one stands on this issue and one can agree
[Amit Varma]: to disagree, it's an unfair criticism of behavioral economics because behavioral economics, the
[Amit Varma]: way I see it is descriptive.
[Amit Varma]: It's not prescriptive.
[Amit Varma]: A lot of these specific prescriptions from which, you know, coercion comes or agency
[Amit Varma]: is taken away from individuals is comes from individual economists, but the field itself
[Guest]: is just describing what human nature is, right?
[Guest]: And that's what it tries to do with that.
[Guest]: This is how humans behave.
[Guest]: Look, you know, we tried to do this, but this is what happened in reality.
[Guest]: And it just tries to describe the behavior and then maybe draw insights from it and then
[Guest]: say, next time they are behaving this way, maybe we could, you know, and then that argument
[Amit Varma]: can happen, but at least it's an informed argument.
[Guest]: For example, this whole thing of default options, right, where, and I like to give the example
[Guest]: of this give it up scheme where the LPG scheme, you know, our prime minister went about saying
[Guest]: everybody now is enrolled in the subsidy and now give it up.
[Guest]: I wanted to say that, you know, I mean, my prescription for it would have been that let
[Guest]: nobody be subscribed to it, say that you are entitled to it as a citizen, you are entitled
[Guest]: to it, but your default position is that you're opted out and let only those people who really
[Guest]: need it, you know, opt in and make the opt in really easy, make it really easy for people
[Guest]: to get this subsidy.
[Guest]: And again, how you give subsidy remains the same, but now a lot of people are not giving
[Guest]: it up just because that's the default position.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just lazy to go to some place and you know, do something.
[Amit Varma]: Inertia, inertia is the most powerful force in human life.
[Amit Varma]: That's what present bias is all about.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But though I would also, my, my instinctive reaction there is that if you make it an opt
[Amit Varma]: in thing, then you inevitably create rent seeking.
[Amit Varma]: It's easy to say in theory that it should be easy to opt in, but you'll create rent
[Amit Varma]: seeking and you'll, you know, everything else that follows with it.
[Amit Varma]: That's true as well.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to the next example.
[Guest]: All right.
[Guest]: So the next example I like to talk about is about social norms.
[Guest]: And there are a lot of things in behavioral economics that revolve around this.
[Guest]: So, you know, there are things called herd behavior, confirmation bias, or social desirability
[Guest]: bias, which all essentially talk about how human behavior is set in a social context,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You are influenced by the society, by the people around you and the decisions you take
[Guest]: or the preferences you have are not just your preference.
[Guest]: Maybe they are your preferences, but yet they're almost always influenced by the people around
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: So what, how you behave is set in a social context and that people want to behave how
[Guest]: their friends behave.
[Guest]: So you see, you know, echo chambers forming on social media.
[Guest]: That is, I want to talk like my friend, so I will, you know, adopt that line of opinion.
[Guest]: And it is a similar set of people who get, you know, who get caught in these echo chambers
[Guest]: or look at confirmation bias where I have a certain viewpoint and I'm always looking
[Guest]: at or reading something with this thing of, Oh, this, this is an alignment with what I
[Guest]: was thinking.
[Amit Varma]: Didn't I say so?
[Amit Varma]: You know, you're always trying to, you value the information, which confirms your bias,
[Guest]: but you ignore everything else.
[Guest]: And that's just human behavior, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you would do that, but what this results in is something known as private truths and
[Guest]: public lies and you would know of it, you know.
[Guest]: So what we do is in private, we might hold certain preferences, but because of the social
[Guest]: norms, because of this social pressure that we have in public, we might state our preferences
[Guest]: very differently, right?
[Guest]: So for example, Timur, Quran and economists talked about preference falsification that
[Guest]: in public, we tend to falsify our preferences.
[Guest]: Now look at how after the new dispensation, the BJP has come to power, we suddenly have
[Guest]: this surge in, you know, anti-Muslim riots or the Hindutva bigotry that we see suddenly,
[Guest]: you know, there is just so much of it, whether it's Pelukan or it's Akhlaq.
[Guest]: Why was this not happening for the last 60 years?
[Guest]: Because maybe the social context was such that this was taboo and maybe people wanted
[Guest]: to talk about these things, but they were not doing because of the social context.
[Guest]: And maybe the context right now has changed that, you know, some people have, they are
[Guest]: the norm entrepreneurs and they've set this norm.
[Guest]: They took that extra chance and said, well, we can talk about this.
[Guest]: And suddenly this whole bunch of people find that they can now express their hidden preferences.
[Amit Varma]: I'd written a column about this a couple of years ago when the whole Trump wave was happening.
[Amit Varma]: And I think to a large extent, social media empowering as it is, and I think it's a net
[Amit Varma]: positive good, enormously so.
[Amit Varma]: But social media has enabled this in the sense that a lot of the phrase I use is closet bigots.
[Amit Varma]: There'd be a lot of people who are closet bigots, but they don't express their bigotry
[Amit Varma]: because it seems impolite or unacceptable around them to do so.
[Amit Varma]: But suddenly through social media, they realized that there are actually a lot of people who
[Guest]: think like that.
[Guest]: They can come out.
[Guest]: There are a lot of them.
[Amit Varma]: And, and they feel empowered to come out and express their bigotry.
[Amit Varma]: And as more, and as they start doing that, it becomes a cascade.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Timur Karan called this a preference cascade.
[Amit Varma]: You know, first, I think the example he gave was of the Soviet Union where everybody assumed
[Amit Varma]: that all the individuals were for the Soviet state, but once people began to express otherwise,
[Unknown]: it kind of cascaded.
[Guest]: And the downfall of the Soviet Union actually seems very sudden, but had been building up
[Guest]: over decades.
[Guest]: But social revolutions seem very sudden, but they're always building up because there are
[Guest]: these individual preferences that are hidden.
[Guest]: And then suddenly some people and which Cass Sunstein, you know, calls them norm entrepreneurs,
[Guest]: that these norm entrepreneurs take the chance and you know, they say, okay, we'll speak
[Guest]: the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: And then suddenly they find a bandwagon.
[Guest]: And social media enables and magnifies this.
[Guest]: You've seen that happening.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: The polarization that social media.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You've seen this with the Trump and the alt-right in the US, you've seen this with Modi.
[Guest]: The white supremacist rallies, the increasing number of rallies that we see.
[Guest]: So that's what I, and the interesting thing is, we don't even know if these are the real
[Guest]: preferences now or other people again, falsifying their preferences, you know, in their heart
[Guest]: of hearts, it's actually something else, but because of this new context, the social context
[Guest]: or the new language that people are speaking, they start to speak this.
[Guest]: They start to confirm to, you know, what is the current context.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is that when we talk of preference falsification, it's not
[Amit Varma]: just falsification for the sake of others.
[Amit Varma]: You're also lying to yourself very often.
[Amit Varma]: And for example, you know, a classic example of how even these preferences, which seem
[Amit Varma]: to now be truly expressed, might actually be falsified as you're saying, is that if
[Amit Varma]: you sort of conflate criticism of the government with being anti-national and, you know, bring
[Amit Varma]: nationalism and Modi together in the same sentence, then people are afraid to, for example,
[Amit Varma]: during demonetization, it was framed in such a way as we are attacking black money.
[Amit Varma]: And if you speak up against it, you're speaking against the nation.
[Amit Varma]: And you would have had people expressing support for demonetization, even though if they really
[Guest]: thought about it, they might not feel that way.
[Guest]: And even though right now, I mean, I'd like to think that, you know, if suddenly the dispensation
[Guest]: actually came out and said, Oh yes, this was a mistake.
[Guest]: It's never going to happen.
[Guest]: But let's assume, let's, you know, think that it happens.
[Guest]: I'm sure a lot of those people who were, you know, singing songs about how demonetization
[Guest]: is going to, you know, clean all the black money will actually then start again saying
[Guest]: the same thing that the government says that, Oh yes, it was a mistake.
[Guest]: So it's, it's just about keeping in tune with the current, you know,
[Amit Varma]: And not just that, another bias, a hindsight bias would kick in and they'd imagine that,
[Guest]: Hey, we thought it was crap all along.
[Guest]: Yeah, I didn't, I said, I was right when I said that.
[Guest]: And it happens all the time.
[Guest]: I mean, let's not blame others.
[Amit Varma]: You and I would do it as well.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, everybody would do it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we are not standing on a pedestal and saying, Oh, you humans are like that.
[Amit Varma]: We are also like this.
[Amit Varma]: We suffer from it.
[Amit Varma]: But what's important about behavioral economics is that it then helps you understand these
[Amit Varma]: biases within yourself and within the context you operate and the policies that you have,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what your government does and the quality of that self-reflection can help you
[Amit Varma]: either live a happier life or be more aware of your unending unhappiness.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to the next example.
[Guest]: So the next example I'd like to talk about is, it's called peak end rule.
[Guest]: What that necessarily says is that the sum total of how a person remembers an experience
[Guest]: is defined by how they felt at the peak of it.
[Guest]: And at the end of it, people tend to ignore the rest.
[Guest]: So if I were to ask you, Hey, Amit, how was the Bangalore lit fest?
[Guest]: You would possibly remember the highlight of it.
[Guest]: And the, you know, if you attended the last few sessions, you would forget the rest.
[Guest]: And the example, a rather controversial one that, you know, I'd give you is that think
[Guest]: of Indira Gandhi's rule.
[Guest]: If you'd ask most people, you know, how was her rule?
[Guest]: They would talk of emergency, which defined the peak of her rule.
[Guest]: And they would talk of, you know, how she was assassinated.
[Guest]: So her becoming a martyr.
[Guest]: And that's how we think of as her rule.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas there was a lot more to it, by the way, she ruled for a long time, right?
[Guest]: And I'm not taking sides of whether she was good or not.
[Amit Varma]: So they'd remember the peak of it and think of her as an authoritarian despot.
[Amit Varma]: And they'd remember the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: And they'd think of her as a martyr who died for the nation.
[Amit Varma]: And both of those may have an element of truth, though I think the former has far more truth.
[Guest]: I would agree actually.
[Guest]: But that's also how, I mean, so we tend to forget that there would have been other elements
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: And most of it actually in her case was not that great, but that's how we remember most
[Amit Varma]: of the things.
[Amit Varma]: And that's how we look back on our own lives.
[Amit Varma]: And which is why, you know, memory is selective.
[Amit Varma]: What we remember is not really what happened.
[Guest]: So we are fabricating a lot of things in between.
[Guest]: What we actually remember is the peak and the end most of the times.
[Guest]: The rest of it is, we are just filling it up, right?
[Guest]: We are fabricating it.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, and we've reached the end of the podcast.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, I will ask my listeners to reflect on what you remember of this podcast.
[Amit Varma]: Chances are it will be the peak and the end.
[Amit Varma]: Nidhi, thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you so much, Amit.
[Guest]: It was a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed the show, you can follow Nidhi on Twitter at Nidhi1902.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want to hear earlier episodes of The Seen and the Unseen, please hop on over
[Amit Varma]: to seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and the Unseen, check out another show by IVM Podcasts,
[Amit Varma]: Simplified, which is hosted by my good friends, Naren, Chuck, and Shriketh.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Amit Varma]: Excuse me, brother.
[Unknown]: Excuse me.
[Unknown]: Tell me, ma'am.
[Unknown]: What's on the menu?
[Unknown]: The menu has Seen Unseen, Podcasts, On Course, Cyrus Says, Marry in India, Rediscovery Project,
[Unknown]: Empowering Series, Sex Wax, IVM Likes, Simplified, Keeping it Queer, Things and Destinations,
[Unknown]: My Neighbor Zuckerberg, and The Fine Garage.
[Unknown]: What do you want?
[Unknown]: Can you repeat it once?
[Unknown]: I don't repeat.
[Unknown]: You go to ivmpodcasts.com and listen to all this.
[Unknown]: Or download their app.
[Unknown]: It's all on your fingers.